Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Dr. Julian Kiverstin. He's senior
researcher at the Lemon Tree Center for Psychiatry, Psychotherapy
and Philosophy at the University. OF Amsterdam and today
we're going to talk about topics like embodied cognition,
phenomenology, neuro phenomenology, the free energy principle, and other
related topics. So Dr. Kierstein, welcome to the show.
It's a big pleasure to everyone.
Thank you so much for the invite and looking
forward to our discussion.
OK, so, I mean, in regards to embodied cognition,
actually it's a topic that I've already talked about
on the show several times, phenomenology, not so much,
but uh I would like to ask you, um,
I mean, what is embodied cognition and how do
you link it or how do you think it's
possible to link it to the phenomenology?
OK, great. So uh we'll just start with embodied
cognition since that's uh, that's quite complex on its
own as a topic. So there are many different
theories of embodiment that, that are, um, you can
find in philosophy and cognitive science and. And I
think er a useful distinction here is the debate
between what I'm gonna call conservative positions that are
broadly in line with the the the traditional conventional
understanding of cognition within cognitive psychology. So they start
from an understanding of cognition as basically information processing
where er information processing involves operations of some kind
over mental representations. And then the idea of this
uh more conservative approach is that some of the
representations that are used in cognition have what is
sometimes called a bodily format, so it might be
that the representations are. Connected to action in some
ways, so they're action oriented representations or it could
be that they have a somatosensory format, so they
involve touch, for example. So you can see how
if you have forms of cognition that involve these
kinds of representations, then we can say that the
cognition is embodied. But they're also more radical theorists
who see themselves as offering an alternative framework for
understanding cognition and for doing a science of cognition.
Where instead of starting from the idea that cognition
can be explained in terms of subpersonal information processing
mechanisms, they will start instead at the scale of
the whole body in its environment. And so these
theories tend to think of cognition. As depending on
the body in a constitutive sense, not just in
a causal sense, that some of the representations that
are used by the brain in doing cognitive tasks
are ones that represent the body. But in the
sense that cognition is something that involves the whole
body in its dynamic interaction with the environment. So
on this more radical approaches, then cognition is understood
as embodied in the sense that it has to
be. Explained at the scale of the whole body.
Uh, SO that is the habits of the body,
the skills of the body, the ways that the
body engages with the environment. So these kind of
approaches are thinking about cognition at the scale of
a whole agent environment system where on the side
of the agent, you find habits and skills for
engaging with the environment and on the side of
the environment, you find er relevant possibilities for action
or affordances. And so this is, this is a
conception where. Organism and environment or age and environment
are co-determining, codependent, in some sense and that to
understand and explain cognition. Our ways of knowing the
environment, we have to start from embodied skills and
habits. So that's the uh the embodied cognition side
of the question. Should we pause there and say
something more about that, or I can turn to
phenomenology when you're ready.
Yeah, I was just going to ask, when it
comes to embodied cognition and the different positions that
people can hold when it comes to it and
it's relation to more, let's say, uh, I think
we could call them actually mainstream approaches in cognitive
science and cognitive psychology. Um, WHAT, what, I mean,
where do you stand exactly? Do you fall more
on a more moderate embodied cognition position or on
a more radical embodied cognition position, and you think
we should, uh, consider the entire body, uh, as
when it comes to understanding, uh, cognition and, uh.
The, the body as being constitutive, as you put
it, when it comes to how cognition works and
also uh relating to the environment more broadly or,
or where do you fall exactly.
So I fall in the radical camp and and
that's because. Well, when I first discovered philosophy in
back in the 1990s as an undergraduate. The the
book The Embodied Mind had just been published and
that had a huge influence on my thinking at
that time as an undergraduate and still does. And,
and that book puts forward an idea of embodiment
that is inspired by phenomenology, which leads us to
your next question. So the idea of that book
was to try to have a cognitive science that
would accommodate and have room for understanding. Uh, FIRST
person subjective lived experiences of the world. And, and
a central aspect of our lived experience is that
it, it, it's embodied. It takes place from an
embodied point of view. It's through our body that
we perceive and act in the world. So our
body is our, is our point of view on
the world. It is our. Our er our subjective
perspective on the world as it were. And And,
and so what was proposed in that book, The
Embodied Mind by um uh Francisco Varela, Evan Thompson,
and Eleanor Roche was that we should think of
cognition as enacted. So inaction here is a technical
term that refers to the engagement of the whole
body with the world and, and how. Um, WE
are constantly doing what is called sense making on
the basis of which we, um, we bring forth
a meaningful environment of action possibilities. Um, SO. Yeah
Uh, this is very complicated, I, I know already,
but the idea is that to try to make
room for lived experience, we have to have this
more, Um, encompassing view of, of what cognition is,
where we recognize how cognition is embodied, how it's
situated in the world. And so there's a kind
of constraint here which is to to do justice,
to to live the experience, to make room for
lived experience. And Varela Thompson and Ross argued that
that that that that was something that was difficult
to do as long as you stayed within the
the more conservative traditional understanding of cognition as information
processing cos within that framework then you get this
the the the hard problem of well how is
it that out of this information processing. And out
of these functional processes, out of behavior. You get
Uh, lived experience, first person subjective experience. And so
they were putting forward a different kind of perspective.
Different framework for understanding what cognition is that they
thought would allow us to then make sense of
what would otherwise be very difficult to to understand
our lived experiences. That's why I ended up in
the radical camp because I, I, I agree with
them that it should be a constraint on cognitive
science that it makes room for first person lived
experience. Sorry, go ahead.
Yeah, so when it comes to the 4E cog
cognition approach, uh, uh, you agree with uh. Of
course we're going to get later into the fourth
E, which is extended cognition, but at least with
the three first E's of cognition being embodied embedded
and enacted or inactive, you agree with them, right?
Yes, I'm in, I'm, I belong to the 4E
cognition movement and so we can think of there
being. There are different generations within cognitive science of
of thinking, um, so the first generation of cognitive
science was. Uh, ARISE in the arose in the
1950s as a response to behaviorism where there were
these ideas of computation, information processing that were beginning
to emerge. Then we had a second generation of
um more biologically inspired models of cognition that started
to think in terms of connectionism and distributed processing
that tried to take the the organization of the
brain as our inspiration for understanding cognition. And that
kind of continues today in machine learning and, you
know, generative AI. These are all models that are
kind of based on those. Uh PARALLEL distributive processing
connectionist ideas. But in the 90s there was also
like a third generation that started to emerge of
people who thought that we need to study cognition
in a real world context, so ecological settings first
of all, which led to a more situated approach.
And within situated cognition, you can find researchers that
were inspirational for the idea of extended and embedded
cognition. And then there were also thinkers who thought
that er the really difficult problem in evolution was
sensory motor coordination, perception and action. And so it's
really from the constraints that arise from the body.
That is uh able to solve this problem of
sensory motor coordination, that we should start when we're
trying to understand how cognition works and then. The,
the higher cognitive functions really are built up from
these more basic sensory motor, perception and action functions.
And so that led to like a situated robotics
and embodied cognition, um, as a kind of third
approach and in philosophy that, Uh, those different approaches
were unified by Sean Gallagher under this heading of
4E cognition, so embodied, embedded, extended, enacted. And I
think another important E is the ecological psychology. I
know you've had some discussions with ecological psychologists on
your podcast before. So I would think that that's
another important E here. Um, BUT that, that relates
in interesting ways to the, to the other four
E's that were already part of the conversation. And
we can discuss more what exactly the relationship is
between the different Es as we go on. But
yeah, I'm very much part of this 3rd generation
of cognitive scientists who think. That uh we that
the four E's are really should be the, the
foundational assumptions that we work from in understanding what
cognition is.
Yes, we will certainly come back to at least
some of the other reasons and, particularly ecological psychology
or the 5th E or of ecological cognition later
on. But going back to the question regarding phenomenology,
so How does phenomenology come into the picture, particularly,
uh, in the domain of philosophy, and how do
you look then at the relationship between embodied cognition
and phenomenology?
Great. Yeah. So phenomenology, first of all we should
um see as um a movement within philosophy that.
AROSE at the turn of the 20th century. Um,
WAS initiated by the German philosopher Edmund Hussa. And
he was concerned with classical philosophical questions like what
is reality, what is truth, how to understand knowledge,
how to understand meaning, logic, mathematics. So he was
really working with foundational questions in philosophy and he
developed a method for addressing those questions. Um, WHICH
involved. Um, A bracketing of the, the natural attitude
that we ordinarily operate with, where the natural attitude
is, you know, what we normally take for granted
in our thinking as scientists, for instance, but also
in our everyday lives when we, you know, we
take for granted the existence of, uh, material worlds,
uh, that we engage with and Hussa didn't deny.
The natural attitude, he didn't, he wasn't a skeptic
about it. But he thought that um. That there
are philosophical questions that arise that we need to
address about how is it possible for us to
er think about, experience a meaningful world. And, and
that we could start to address those questions by
adopting this method of bracketing or suspending the natural
attitude. Um So What the phenomenologist is, is led
back to then having performed this. Um, THIS method
of bracketing the natural attitude is the world that
we ordinarily live in, the life world, and our
ways of experiencing that. So phenomenology is concerned with
how the world appears to us, how it's given
to us in our everyday experiences, and then gives
us a method for, for describing lived experience. So
why is that important for cognitive science? You might
think that. That that uh our everyday experiences don't
really give us a window on how the mind
works because the mind is in its workings is
something that is not consciously accessible to us. You
know, so in in standard cognitive science we think
of. Most of cognition as as having the form
of unconscious computation that, you know, that goes on
behind the scenes without us really knowing anything about
it. So how could it possibly be then that
phenomenology provides any constraints on our science of cognition
if most of what happens in cognition is not
accessible to consciousness. And um the phenomenologist's response to
that or people who are engaging with phenomenology within
cognitive science is that we should think of cognitive
science and phenomenology as really having different methods, different
questions and different concerns. And those concerns overlap when
it comes to the philosophical assumptions that er cognitive
science operates with. So if we go back to
the, the generations of cognitive science that I described,
the 3 generations, each of them operates with certain
kind of conceptual philosophical picture of the mind and
how the mind relates to the world. So, in
both of the 1st 2 generations of cognitive science,
the idea was really that. Um, THAT the mind.
Is able to get knowledge of the world via
some kind of er internal representation or internal model
of the world. And that representational model. The debate
between the 1st and 2nd generation cognitive scientists was
about how to think about the nature of those
representations. So in first generation cognitive science, the representations
were understood along the lines of language or or
pictures. And so that was the kind of view
of representations, they were either imagistic. Or they were
propositional and then you had debates about whether the
imagistic ones were also propositional. I think about the
debate between er Stephen Coslin for instance and Xenon
Poliian. And then later on, you had the connectionists
who said that the representations were not language like,
they were very sub um conceptual or they were.
Non-conceptual, preconceptual, um, more like the sorts of representations
that we use in, Um, in classification, in pattern
recognition. So they were statistical in nature, concerned with
patterns of some sort. And the 3rd generation argued,
well, maybe we don't need representations at all to
understand the mind-world relation. We should instead start from
the ecological idea of direct perception, for instance, where.
Perception and action systems are able to pick up
information that specifies affordances, or we'll start from the
idea of inaction and sense making that that self
and world are. A rising together somehow. And, and,
and that happens in the sensory motor interaction of
the self with the world. So you get a
kind of non-representational approaches that begin to emerge. And,
and those not, so what I'm trying to bring
out here are the. Underlying philosophical theories and assumptions
that are in play in cognitive science all the
time when we're offering models, theories, explanations in cognitive
science. And how phenomenology becomes relevant for interrogating and
questioning those philosophical assumptions. So the idea of phenomenology
as a constraint on explanation in cognitive science is
that we should think of phenomenology as describing what
it is that we want to understand and make
intelligible in scientific terms. And what it's describing is,
is our everyday lived experience that we start from
actually as scientists. Um, SO we're always involved with
the world in some way, even as scientists we're
involved with the world. Just it's the world in
the context of the laboratory of the scientists. It's
a, it's a scientific life world that the scientist
engages with. So the Um, so the phenomenologist says,
well, let's start from lived experience and how that's
analyzed and described carefully in phenomenology, and we can
take that as the, the explananum, the thing that
needs to be explained by our, um, our scientific
work in cognitive science. Um, SO it's true that,
you know, introspection doesn't give us access to the
workings of the mind, but phenomenology is not introspection.
It offers a different kind of method for describing
and analyzing lived experience. Um, AND so the argument
is that we should then start from that, what
we learn from phenomenology about. Our embodiment about our
situatedness in the world and take that to be.
A description and analysis of what it is that
needs to be explained in cognitive science, and so
in that sense phenomenology becomes this constraint on explanation
in cognitive science. Does that make sense? Yeah, that
was very nonsense, sorry, but hopefully Aaron, you managed
to follow everything and we can just slow down
and go back over anything that that uh was
not clear for your listeners.
Yes. Uh, I, I mean, I was just wondering,
uh, what, what do you make then of uh
approaches in more, let's say traditional cognitive science, traditional
psychology. Where people might even, of course, we're talking
about representational computational approaches here, but when they, for
example, uh, assume, uh, uh, assume or study whether
Certain aspects of our psychology might be, and I,
and I know that this is a disputed kind
of concept, and I mean I've already discussed it
with psychologists on the show, but that certain aspects
of our psychology. Uh, MIGHT be innate or might
have a biological or an evolutionary basis to it
and so that they would be at least to
a certain extent influenced by genetics. I mean, is
that something that um a framework that includes embodied
cognition or even more broadly for e-cognition. And phenomenology
would go against, or do they complement that sort
of approach? I mean, how, how do you look
at that potential relationship there?
Mhm. Very good, yeah, so. I think all embodied
theories of cognition try to aim for biologically realistic
theories of cognition, so they go beyond actually what
was what developed in the 2nd generation of cognitive
science where uh we started from roughly the architecture
of the brain. In connectionist neural networks and then
try to model cognition on the roughly the architecture
of the brain. They go beyond that in that
they think that um that even in those neural
network models, there's, there's a lot of details of
the substrate that are abstracted away from and treated
as merely to do with the implementation. And so
that you can then start to model computationally the
brain processes, whereas, Uh, in the 3rd generation, the
idea was, no, we should start from thinking about
early organisms who were able to adapt to their
environments by coordinating their sensory motor behaviors with the
affordances of those environments. So, maybe we should start
from the organization of biological systems in thinking about.
How cognition works, and this is er sometimes called
the life mind or life cognition continuity principle that
the organizational properties of living systems can be thought
of as a a guide to er the organizational
properties of cognitive systems or systems that have minds.
You know, so we're starting from the idea of
self-organization in thinking about. Uh, HOW cognition could work
or what it is to have a mind. Um,
THE idea that living systems are adaptive, they're also
autopoetic, which means that they produce their own organization
in their engagement with their surroundings. And we're gonna
start from adaptivity and er biological autonomy, which is
a kind of autopoiesis in in thinking about er
how cognitive systems are organized. And, so the link
there with uh with biology is through thinking about
what, what are the organizational properties that living systems
have. Um, AND how do those then relate to
the organizational properties of cognitive systems. And the idea
in. This 3rd generation of cognitive sciences that we
can think of there being a kind of continuity
that takes us from, The organizational properties of life,
so single-celled organisms, plants. Multicellular organisms, they already have
some of the key ingredients that are required for,
uh for cognizing, where those ingredients are things like
being self-producing, self-maintaining, um, being adaptive. Yeah. Um, SO
what, how would we then think about the innateness,
uh, empiricism debates, the nativism, empiricism debate, um, against
this backdrop. Um, WELL, I think in a way,
no, both are true, nativism and empiricism and most
people in biology think that now as well. So
they're either or there I think we should challenge.
And how are they both true? Well, because it,
it's important to think about the development of er
of organisms, how, how do they. You know, processes
like morphogenesis, so how does the organism become, come
to have the kind of body that it has.
And those processes of development and morphogenesis are, are
processes that. You know, where there are constraints that
come from uh evolution and natural selection that, um
but we also need to think about how those
constraints enter into the, the development of a self-organizing
system. And Uh, so that's a complicated answer, but
I hope you roughly see where what I'm gesturing
at in, in developmental biology, in evolutionary biology for
thinking about this. So Suzanne Oyama's idea of developmental
systems theory has been a, a big influence on
people and inaction. Uh, WHO, who tend to think
about. Um, NO, there isn't genes that code for
traits. Instead we need to think about. Development in,
in, um. Well, we need to think about the
contribution of genes. Uh, IN a bigger developmental system.
And that means looking at the history of that
system over time. Yeah.
Uh, THE, the development of that system over time,
but, uh, the development of, uh, individual, uh, organisms,
organisms, exactly, organism, organism centered approach to, to biology
rather than starting from the, the genes, we would
start from the, the organism and thinking about evolution
and thinking about life. It's the form of the
whole organism in its environment that that we we
start from. And the organism is a kind of
agent. Yeah, so, and that's why this notion of
bio biological autonomy comes up that. That there's a
um a goal directedness to the behavior of organisms
where. The goals are not something that we just
ascribe to the organism as observers of it, but
that they're rather something that, um, the organism sets
for itself because of uh this drive to survive,
to maintain itself in in its engagement with the
environment. So the organism is the source of its
own purposes, goals and norms, and that's why it
makes sense to think of organisms as agents. So
right, so, uh, but I mean er I I
am
maybe we wanna go back to phenomenology eventually because
there's a story about where phenomenology comes into that
as well that we could get into. But, uh,
you know, you, you steer the conversation in the
way that you, you want it.
Yeah, yeah, I will come back to phenomenology in
a second. Let me just ask you at least
one, perhaps two questions regarding all of what you
said there. So when it comes to, when you
talked about constraints and constraints and how they operate,
um, And influence self-organization of the organism during development.
I mean, are those constraints because I know that,
I mean looking at development and even evolution from
the point of view of the organism and not
from A gene's eye view or a gene centric
perspective, I mean those are two different approaches and
so the way we need to think about things
here is very different, but I mean when it
comes to those constraints on self-organization, uh, are they
in any way. Of course, I guess that no
one at this point in time would say that
they are genetically determined, but are they, do you
think that they are in any way, uh, genetically
influenced? I mean that that there's um. Those constraints,
is there any information in the genes that influence
those constraints, or that at least to some extent
impose those constraints on self-organization or not.
Well, we, we would challenge the idea that that
the genes are encoding information. And that's, um They
Information is a difference that makes a difference according
to to Bateson, and that's how he he defines
information. And, and so. It, it can't be that
the, that the genes are just these vehicles that
carry information if you understand information in that sense
of a difference that makes a difference. You need
instead to look at how the genes are, are
taken up within a larger system and the, the
way that they impact on the developmental process and
that requires looking. Uh The, the Contribution of genes
over time and and thinking about. Them in the
context of a larger complex system which in the
end is going to be an organism in an
environment, so exactly what, you know, think about epigenetics,
how the genes contribute to development is influenced in
all kinds of ways by the environment that the
organism is developing in. And, and you can make
similar arguments about saying, The contribution of genes within
larger networks and how there's all kinds of Um
Uh I want to to say that just like
in the brain, there are not, uh there's not
a 1 to 1 relationship between function and structure.
Similarly, in genetic networks, there's not a 1 to
1 relationship between the, the traits and the gene,
but exactly how the gene ends up contributing to
development, we have to think about in this way
that allows for pluri potentiality, redundancy. Um, SO you're,
you're looking at a system where there's a lot
of feedback relations in play, and, uh, it's a
dynamical system, um, and the, the way that the
genes contribute to development we need to think of
as part of this dynamical complex process. So that's
the picture that I, I would argue for in
thinking about how, what contributions genes are making here.
And it's a kind of dynamical developmental systems perspective
and. And then going back to constraints, you know.
I think that the thing I want to emphasize
there is that the the constraints are biochemical constraints
often. And when we think about how, um, constraint,
the constraints that come from the body are shaping
cognition and the mind, the, the constraints are often
biochemical, which means that when we try to give
computational models of cognition, we're often abstracting away from
the details of the substrate which are very important
details for understanding how cognition works if we have
this more, Ecological biological approach to cognition, we can't
really abstract away from all of those biochemical details.
In order to give a kind of substrate independent
medium independent description of, well we can of course,
but the thing is that that's an abstraction or
idealization that we're doing there and there's a lot
of important details that are getting left out. The
Masvita Chilamuta is very good about this in her
book The Brain Abstracted. I don't know if you've
had her on your, uh, podcast yet. Yeah,
yes, I've had her on the show two years
ago if I remember correctly. OK,
yeah, great, yeah, yeah. So I think the arguments
that she makes about, uh, how explanation works in.
Neuroscience that it often involves abstraction and idealization, these
are really important arguments um, in relation to embodiment,
because what they highlight is that there's a lot
of important detail in this, the way the substrate
is organized, that we need to take into account
in order to understand cognition and some of that
detail of course is genetic. Um, BUT I just
think we shouldn't understand genes as like codes because
that is part of the same. Way of thinking
about um biology. This kind of information processing metaphor,
computational metaphor that. Uh, THAT was part of the
1st and 2nd generation of cognitive science, but I
think 4E cognition is offering something else, something different
from that. That in many ways fits with other
things that are happening in biology and. So it
fits well with Michael Levin's work, it fits with
uh this recent book by Philip Ball about you
know things that have happened in biology in recent
years. And It fits with like the Evo Devo
stuff and. You know, so there's a lot of
things in biology that are taking place that are
very much convergent with the developments in 4E cognition
as well.
Yes, that recent book by Dr. Philip Ball is
also very interesting. I actually interviewed him on the
show about it as well. So if people are
interested in watching that interview, so, um,
but I didn't see that one. I'll go back
and find that.
So, um, going then uh back to phenomenology or
at least trying to bring phenomenology into the picture
here because now we're talking about, uh, biology, about
development, developmental biology constraints, and then how that plays
out at the level of cognition. So, uh, how
does phenomenology, um, Uh, I mean, how do you
bring phenomenology back into the picture here? I mean,
what does it add to the picture and how
can it inform how we explore, uh, questions regarding
biology development and cognition?
Yeah So I think that a useful way to
answer that question is to go back to Evan
Thompson's second book, Mind and Life. Which was written
after the Embodied Mind and published in 2007. Um,
AND in that book he argues for what he
calls the deep continuity of life and mind. Uh,
SO, so far what we've been exploring is the
idea that there's a continuity between the organizational properties
of living systems and, and cognitive systems, and, and
we've talked about that in terms of, uh, self-organization,
autopoiesis, adaptivity, these kinds of concepts, biological autonomy. So
the idea that Thompson explores in that book is
that. Uh, ALSO in living systems we can see
the beginning of what he describes as a kind
of inner mental life. In that er any living
system. And this idea goes back to Spinoza as
well. Has this drive to survive, it has a
concern for its own continuation. And that kind of
drive for its own continuation. Hans Jonas, the philosopher,
bioethicist, talks about in terms of need for freedom.
Gives the organism, a kind of inward point of
view on the world, relative to which it can
then do what, That is called sense making by
people that work in inaction. And sense making is
the beginnings of cognition. Um, SO what. Is argued
for with this deep continuity of life and mind,
is that, there was already the beginnings of the
anticipation of, The kinds of structures of lived experience
which are described in phenomenology in the earliest of
life forms. Because of the cannaus, because of this
concern for the continuation of the organism. Um, THE
care, the concern for its own existence, that's already
there in the beginnings of life. And so we
can then argue on that basis. That there's something
about the organizational properties of living systems that will
also help us to understand lived experience and the
structures of lived experience and how, As subjects we're
able to constitute a meaningful world in our engagement
with our surroundings. So that phenomenological idea of constitution.
Which is a way of thinking about the intentionality,
uh the. The directedness of the mind at the
world, that kind of. Uh, INTENTIONAL structure, you can
already trace back to, to the earliest of life
forms, so that that gives us a kind of
deep continuity of, of life and the phenomenological mind.
So, uh, I want to ask you about a
specific kind of, um, subjective experience that we have
that has to do with pain and how an
embodied approach and in this particular case, uh, an
embodied predict predictive processing approach can help us understand
it. So uh tell us about uh predictive processing.
And how then it can combine with embodied cognition
to understand the experience of pain.
OK, now. So there's uh there's a lot in
that question that we need to to go through
really to to see how it it relates to
the things we've been talking about so far. And
I think that what I want to start from
is with the phenomenology of pain. And, and the
subjectivity of pain. So from the conversation that we've
been having so far, I hope that your listeners
can see that for me it's a fundamental requirement
on the, the adequacy of any scientific theory or
model that it accommodates and does justice to the,
the phenomenology, the richness of lived experience. Mhm. Um,
SO that's the kind of starting point for me
that, that the datum that needs to be explained
is the subjectivity of pain. And so what I
mean by that is that. There, there isn't really
a difference between um it appearing to someone that
they're in pain and they're being in pain. The
appearance is the reality. So it doesn't make sense
so I'll say to somebody who reports that they're
in pain, that they're not in pain. And it's
not something that you could be mistaken about if
you're, if you feel pain, then you then that
that feeling is your reality, that's the reality of
your lived experience of that moment. So I start
from that subjectivity of pain as the thing that
we need to understand. Then you might think, well,
Pain has this mysterious subjective quality to it, um.
And you know it's unpleasant. It, it hurts. And,
and so, How can it be that as scientists,
we can start to. Um, EXPLAIN, make intelligible. The
quality of pain, the unpleasantness of it. Uh, THE
sensory quality that it has. And that of course
is the hard problem of consciousness, which I'm sure
you've had many people on your podcast talking about
before. Yes, um. Now, I think that pain is
much more complex than just the unpleasantness, the hurting.
So in the psychology and neuroscience of pain, we
now make a distinction between the sensory discriminatory component
of pain, the effective motivational component. And the cognitive
evaluative component of pain. And so pain is this
very complex construct that involves all of these different
dimensions, and it's also modulated in all kinds of
ways by. Uh, YOUR social support, so if you
have a loved one next to you and you're
in pain, then that can reduce your pain. It's
modulated by your expectations, so you have the nocebo
effect where expecting pain can make it worse. Are
the placebo effect where expecting pain can actually down
modulate the pain and make it feel better. So
we see that cognition that sorry, pain is cognitively
very complex, it has all of these different dimensions
to it. And phenomenologically I think it's also very
interesting in that pain is this sensing of the
body, so that's part of pain. You feel pain
within the boundaries of your body. But pain also
influences your attitude towards the world. So if you're
in pain, then there are now things that you
can't do because of the pain. Um, WELL, not
always, so people that are athletes can just. Be
in pain but er it doesn't interfere with their
performance, they're able to not give any attention to
it and just push through. But often, you know,
pain is something that stops us in our tracks,
it's um it interrupts or disrupts our fluid engagement
with the world. Mhm Um, SO the phenomenology of
it is that we have to make sense of
how pain can be this local sensing of the
body. So it can be something that it has
this inner character to it, we feel it from
the inside, we feel it in our body, but
it also has this outer directedness to it that
it changes our attitude towards the world and how
we engage with the world. So that's the phenomenological
side of it that I think is the datum
that we need to make sense of. And then
I think, well, predictive processing is helpful here because
it gives us a framework for understanding how it
is that. Um, THESE two dimensions of pain can
come together, the sensing of the body from the
inside and the outer directed attitude towards the world
component of it. Um, HOW it does that, we
need to get into more information about what predictive
processing is exactly, so maybe I just pause there
and let you respond before we go into the
predictive processing side of it.
Yeah, um, I mean, but actually, I, I think
we can just get into that aspect of it,
about predictive processing. So what does that entail exactly?
Yeah, so the key idea of predictive processing is
that um instead of thinking of organisms as passively
receiving and taking in sensory impressions from the world,
this kind of empiricist picture. We think of um
perception, let's start from perception, pain is a kind
of perception. Um, WE think of perception as a
more active process of anticipation. So, er, the incoming
information from the world, sensory information. Is being met
by your, um, your predictions, top down, where those
predictions are coming from. Things that we talked about
earlier and uh the hardwired um. Expectations that we
have and that come from natural selection. But also
from learning, um, so predictions are, you know, we
can learn for instance that fire is gonna burn
us if we come into contact with us with
it. And so there's a prediction there that if
you're approaching fire, then there's a possibility of tissue
damage. And So these kinds of predictions are meeting
up with sensory information and then the percept is
the result of combining those predictions with the the
incoming sensory information to make inferences, inferences about what
is likely to be happening in the body and
in the world. And that sounds like a very
computational information processing kind of model of how perception
works and so how does that square with the
things that we've been talking about at the beginning
of our conversation from 4E cognition. That's one of
the big discussions. Is there an incompatibility between. The
predictive processing theory. And um, And 4 ideas, I
think there isn't, um, but we need to. Refine
some of the ways in which predictive processing is
sometimes interpreted and presented, in order to see that
there is a a compatibility here, that goes back
to the thing that I said before about how
whenever we do science, we're operating with certain philosophical
assumptions. And I think you can certainly read predictive
processing in a way that it's in line with.
Second generation cognitive science in operating with a basically
connectionist neural network way of thinking, where there's representations,
it's just they're not, They're not um linguistic or
imagistic, they're, they're more uh like pattern recognition, statistical
representations. Um, SO in order to get from a
2nd generation understanding of predictive processing to a 4E
understanding. I think it's necessary to to give a
different interpretation of what the anticipating brain is doing.
Uh, WHERE we think of the anticipating brain as
working together with other bodily processes, this is what
makes it embodied. So the, the brain is working
as part of the autonomic nervous system in reciprocal
interaction with the immune system and with the neuroendocrine
system. Um, AND pain is the result of this
kind of conversation between these different systems, which takes
place across the whole neural axis. So pain is
a process that doesn't just unfold in the brain.
Pain isn't in the brain, pain is in the
whole body. Because it involves all these complex interactions
between all of these systems, and pain is also
a way of making sense of the world, it's
a kind of sense making. So pain is then
gonna influence the goals that you pursue, it's gonna
influence the meaning that you give to the environment.
So we propose to understand predictive processing. As an
ecological inactive process, as as something that can be
integrated with ideas from ecological psychology um and from
inactive cognitive science. And no, there's, there's some people
that say no you can't do that, and you've
had some of them on your podcast. I think
no, there's an incompatibility here between these approaches. Um,
SO Ezekiel Di Paolo published a paper called Forking
Paths or something like that where he tries to
argue that, uh, predictive processing and inactive ideas are
just on different paths in cognitive science and they
can't really be brought together, but I think that's
a mistake and that they can actually be married
in interesting ways and so that's what I've been
trying to do with my colleagues.
And in what ways? I mean, I know that
probably you haven't yet arrived at your final goal
there, but in what ways do you think that
can be done?
So I think that we need to now go
a little bit into some of the technical details
to see how it could work. Um, BUT the
fundamental idea in predictive processing is prediction error minimization,
where prediction error can mathematically under certain assumptions be
mapped onto free energy and, um, so yeah,
I, I've, I've just to say that I had
Doctor Carl Friesston on the show as well and
we talked about those aspects.
Uh, THAT'S great. So we don't need to go
into too much of the technical details fortunately cos
Professor Friston has done that with you already, which
is, uh, which is helpful for me because the
technical details are very complicated, but yes. But, so
what we try to do is understand free energy
as to do with the, the dynamics, uh, within
the agent environment system, so instead of just thinking
of it. As there's this. A sensory epithelia that
separates the organism from the environment, which is the
Markov blanket. And the Markov blanket is made up
of these sensory and active states, and those act
as a kind of boundary separating the organism from
the environment. We think of the Markov blanket as
actually dynamically coupling the organism with the environment. So
then free energy becomes a measure of the dynamics
within this larger agent environment system. And the minimization
of free energy is then about. Acting so as
to improve grip on the environment, so as to
move towards or away from affordances that are gonna
allow you to adapt to a dynamically changing environment.
So free energy increases when something surprising happens in
your engagement with the world. And that surprise is
not always a bad thing, sometimes it's something that
we can learn from and and can help us
to uh to grow, to better adapt to the
environment um. But the, the key thing is that
the free energy, the surprise that free energy is
tracking. Is something to do with the dynamics of
the Asian environment systems, and not just something that
is, uh, detected and minimized by internal processes in
the brain, but, uh, a whole bodily process of
coupling with the environment, so that's the 4E way
of interpreting. Um, THE predict the free energy minimization,
predictive processing framework. I went quite quickly over that,
but hopefully it gives the the rough picture of
how it works and. So technically if we want
to go into the mathematics of it, part of
the free energy principle is the KL divergence, which
is the difference between your, Um, your inferred posterior
and the actual posterior in the environment. So we
think of the KL divergence as as a measure
of the agent environment coupling. And rather than think
of it as something that is to do with
the internal model, um, and it's mismatch with the
environment because there are prediction errors. We think of
the the chao divergence as a way of modeling
the agent environment dynamics.
So I mean with all of that in mind
when it comes to approaching the free energy principle
from a more ecological and active perspective, if I
understood that correctly, I mean, do you think that
we can understand the feeling of being alive scientifically?
I mean, and of course, uh, I think we
also have to add to that the phenomenology that
we've already been been exploring here, but I mean,
how can we do that? How can we understand
this feeling of being alive from a scientific perspective?
Mm, mhm. So there's a difficult question here about
where sentience arises in in uh. The chain of
life and how far back can we go and
still find sentience, so are plants sentient. Are a
single-celled organisms sentient. And given the the life mind
continuity idea that I outlined for you. You can
argue for a kind of biopsychist picture as it's
been called that Ernst Hackel, uh, was a proponent
of in the 19th century that we can trace
sentience back to the beginnings of life. There's a
kind of basic minimal subjectivity or sentience that is
a part of being alive and that relates, you
might say, to the karnatas, to the drive to
survive. Yeah. And um no that's something that's been
challenged by a number of thinkers. Peter Godfrey Smith
in his work on, on consciousness and the evolution
of consciousness and has argued for a more gradualist
picture that. Uh, THAT it's not the case that
life, um, immediate that sentience emerges with the dawn
of life, but then it gradually develops out of
processes that are to do with the sensory motor
complexity of the organism. Um, AND I would tend
to agree with, um, Godfrey Smith that we need
a kind of gradualist picture. And Evan Thompson also
argues for this in a paper on biopsychism that
he published. Um, THAT There isn't really a good
argument from. Uh, THE Differential responsiveness that you see
in the behavior of simple organisms like E. COLI
that are able to do chemotaxis where they are
drawn towards food sources and move away from acids
that could be potentially dangerous to them. So that
kind of avoidance behavior I think is not enough
for pain if we go back to the pain
example again. And so we can ask, well, where
did pain first arise in um nervous system, er
sorry, in organisms. And I think it first arose
with organisms that had a nervous system. Um, AND
so when did you first get nervous systems, when
there was the right, well, when you had organisms
that could start to move and how to coordinate
their sensing with their moving. So the beginnings of
of sentience, I've argued in a recent chapter. Um,
ARE sensory motor, uh, coordination. As soon as you
have organisms that do sensory motor coordination, then you
have organisms that need to be able to, to
have arousal, and they need to have valence, the
ability to feel the difference between, you know, what
is good, what is bad for the organism's self-maintenance.
So I think we can make an argument that
with sensory motor agency. You get the beginning of
um of sentience. In that you get this valence
and you get arousal. Um, BUT before there were
any nervous systems. Then I think you, you have
sense making for sure, so you have cognition that
I don't think you have sentience yet. Can we
explain the feeling of being alive? Yes, we can,
um, but it needs to be a gradualist explanation,
I think. And, so one that sees. There being
intermediate cases maybe where it isn't straightforwardly obvious whether
there's valence and arousal or not. Um, IN between
sorts of cases like Godfrey Smith has argued for
and probably. On different er branches of the tree
of life, you see different forms of sentience as
well, in that different life forms inhabit different environments
and are sensitive to those environments in different ways.
So again, Godfrey Smith has er. Has written beautifully
about this in the Metazoa book and before that
in the, the other Minds book about the cephalopods,
um,
But then I mean, I mean if we need
to have sensory motor agents and for that we
need to have a, if I understood it correctly,
a nervous system, then I mean that would exclude
plants from sentience necessarily.
Yeah, so I, I'm happy to say that, um,
or I'm willing to concede and not everyone wants
to agree with this that. That plants are not
sentient, um. So I'm not a panpsychist. Nor am
I a biopsychist, so panpsychists say that. Uh, THAT
the universe contains, well, it is conscious in some
sense, and, and that can be developed in different
ways. There are different versions of panpsychism. Um, AND
then the biopsychist says, no, the, the universe matter
is not, uh, conscious. But er it takes a
certain kind of organization to be to be sentient
and that's the organization of living systems. And then
the gradualist position is that. Uh, BIOPSYCHISTS are wrong.
Not all living systems are sentient. Rather sentience is
something that. Um, EMERGED at a certain level of
complexity, um, where that the, the kind of complexity
that's required is to have a. A nervous system.
And I think that nervous, well, there's the biology
of where did nervous systems first evolve. Um, AND
there are theories like, um, Fred Kaiser here in
the Netherlands. Who argue that nervous systems are for
sensory motor coordination, so the first nervous systems, Evolved
for the purpose of coordinating sensing and moving, so
think about jellyfish as an example of this where,
You've got a multicellular organism that has these, the
cells that are distributed across its body and it
has to solve the problem of how to coordinate.
The activity in those cells so as to move
through its environment smoothly. Uh, SO solving that problem
of sensory motor coordination I think is where where
we first got sentience from.
So, uh, uh, that's about the feeling of being
alive. Uh, DO you think that we can use
the, or the free energy principle, uh, as we've
explored it earlier through a more ecological and active,
uh, perspective, uh, can, uh, that it can help
us understand the self. I mean, what, what is
the self exactly?
Uh, WELL, the self is not one thing, so,
uh, like, like with, with pain, it's, it's a
complex construct again, um. Um, NO, so we might
think that pain is, is very simple and you're
gonna find it in the, in simple organisms that
do approach a void, and so there's not any
complexity to it, but actually that's not the case
even in, in simple organisms that. Have nervous systems
and can feel pain, it still has a complexity
to it. Uh, AND that complexity evolved and became
more complex in different life forms as I've been
describing, but it's the same for the self. So
I, I think that the self arguably begins with,
uh, subjectivity. And so the, the first. Uh, GLIMMERS
of sentience. Uh, ARE accompanied by a sense of
selfhood, and, and the notion of the self there
is what Susan Hurley called a, a dynamic singularity.
You know, um, that. Is anchored in the body,
so it's a kind of bodily self. Um, SO
pain is an experience of the bodily self in,
in a way that, um, I, I started to
unpack earlier on in that it's, it's an, uh,
it's sensed in the body first of all, um,
but it, it's also an experience that then shapes
your perception and action. So how you engage with
the world. So, so pain is kind of centered
in the body. Uh, AND is the experience of
a bodily self, and it's through the pain experience
that then you experience the world. That's what makes
it an experience that has this intentional structure of
connecting the body to the world. The body and
world are arising together. That's the phenomenology of it.
But on the body side of things, there is
the, the self as the subject of that experience,
so. Subjectivity or selfhood. I think go together in
the sense that there's er a a kind of
selfhood that's to do with ah this is happening
to me. I have a sense of ownership for
this experience. I have a sense of agency for
it in that the actions I initi I initiate
because I'm having this experience are my actions. So
there's a kind of mindness. An ipsaity to use
the phenomenological term. That originates in the body. Uh,
THAT is a part of the structure of every
experience, so selfhood begins with this, with the embodiment
of our experiences, the, the body is the self
or subjects, that's uh. Maleonte, Maurice Malloponte, the phenomenologist's
way of putting it, that the body is our
medium of experience and by which he means that
the, the body is both a subject and an
object, it's the. It's er it's an embodied self
that is the subject of our experiences. So how
would we then begin to explain that notion of
selfhood? Well, in the predictive processing theory, they model
the self using processes of multi-sensory integration. So the,
the layers of processing within predictive processing that are
bringing together into a coherent model. The different streams
of sensory information that can be from the external
senses, but also from inception from what's happening inside
of the body. This process of integrating those different.
Um, SENSORY streams. Gives rise to a bodily self
that has a point of view on the world.
And in predictive processing that's thought of very much
as a self model inside of the brain that
the brain is constructing. Um, BUT I, I would
like to, to offer a more ecological and active
interpretation of that where. OK. The, you know, the
process of the multi-sensory integration is something that doesn't
just happen in the brain, it, it involves the
whole body in its uh dynamic interactions with the
world.
Uh, AND, OK, and, uh, how would, would that
play out then? I mean, what would that ecological
and active, uh, approach to the self entail, and
I mean, in what ways would it differ from
our more traditional approaches to the self?
This is where I think the the free energy
principle is important to have in view because um.
It starts from the the idea of um that
living systems to exist. HAVE to act according to
this imperative of minimizing free energy. So it goes
back to the the Schrodinger idea in what is
life that that living systems are systems that are
are able to to make use of thermodynamics to
continue to exist. And, so they're able to make
use of the, the energy around them, um, their
own metabolic resources, so as to, to continue to
exist over time. And uh in so, so living
systems are resisting this tendency towards disorder by making
use of thermodynamic energy to. To survive. Um, AND
the free energy principle gives you a way of
unpacking that mathematically. That idea of um self-maintenance, the
maintaining of the organization of the organism. Uh, SO
I would first of all see free energy, uh,
the free energy principle as something that's working at
the level of the whole organism as a living
system. Um, AND that's not necessarily how Kyl interprets
it, so this is my own Karl Friston, this
is my own kind of perspective on it, but
we've published work together about nested Markov blankets that
that fits with this organism. Uh Centered way of
thinking about life. And, uh, so I think that
there's not an um an incompatibility there actually in
the way that I would read Free Energy principle
and and Karl Fristen's work. I think his work
can be read and interpreted in lots of different
ways and, and the ecological inactive reading is one
way of doing it. So then thinking about the
self, that the self is an organism, um. So,
um, well, that I, I, I, that kind of
contradicts what I said earlier about the gradualism, so
I need to take that back a little bit.
Yeah, so I, I think, um, in understanding the,
the free energized free free energy minimizing processes that.
Uh, THAT are generating selfhood and subjectivity, we need
to start from the whole organism in its environment,
that's the ecological inactive part of it. And the
organism is this self-producing adaptive. Uh, Um, COMPLEX system,
um, so, you know, starting from that whole complex
adaptive system and its environment, I think we can
get an explanation of, of selfish. Tony Chimiro has
this new book called Intertwined Creatures. Tony Chimiro is
one of the radical embodied cognitive scientists that I
mentioned at the beginning of our discussion. And in
that book he's he's concerned with self and other
and and uh understanding self and other using the
tools of embodied radical embodied cognitive science and dynamical
systems theory, ecological psychology. And I think the talk
the story he tells there is is about the
dynamics within the agent environment system that he he's
interested in synergistic dynamics. And there's a there's a
bridge there that I think we can build. Tony
would disagree with this, so that's er something that
we can maybe talk about, but I think there's
a bridge that we can build from. The dynamical
self-organizing ideas that he's describing in that book intertwined
creatures and. And the free energy principle ideas.
Mhm. So I would like to ask you now,
um, and I just have two more topics that
I would like to cover today, um. I mean,
because uh you approach things from a 4E cognition
perspective, I, I mean actually we can expand it
to a 5E cognition perspective because you also have
the ecological cognition aspect with, I, I mean, what
are then the boundaries of the mind? I mean,
does it have uh specific boundaries
or. So it's thinking about the boundary of the
mind, um, so in the free energy principle, the,
the boundary is mapped onto. A Markov blankets, so
there's er sensory and active states that, Are separating
the body from the rest of the environment, so
they act as a kind of interface between the
the body and the world in the standard kind
of formulations of the. Free energy principle, but in
our ecological inactive reading of it, we tend to
think of the sensory and active states. Um, THAT,
uh, as coupling the agent and environment, so we
start from this idea of, um, sensory motor loops,
and that are dynamically. Uh, UNFOLDING in ways that
are, are closed by the things that we're engaging
with in the world. So these are, are loops
that we, we close through our interaction with the
world. Um, AND if you think of the, the,
the self as what Susan Hurley called this dynamic
singularity that anchors these different sensory motor feedback loops
in the body. Then the boundary that separates the
self from the world becomes more fluid and negotiable.
Um, IT'S not this fixed boundary. And I know
that we're gonna get on to talking about enculturation
later, but I think this is a place where
we, we see the, the way that the boundary
between the agent and the environment is fluid and
negotiable. And I can talk more about how that's
the case, but now the picture that I think
we should move towards here is one where there's
not this kind of. Biological boundary, a membrane. And
that is somehow. Enforcing a separation of the agent
from its environment. Uh, Instead, we should think in
terms, uh, and Susan Hurley brilliantly in her 1998
book Consciousness in Action, also a very. Influential book
for me. And she already highlighted that. That that
boundary er between the the organism and the environment
is not separating the organism from the environment, instead.
There's there's this constant reciprocal feedback that goes on
from the environment back to the agent and from
the agent back out into the world. So you
have a complex system where because of the continuous
reciprocal influence of the agent on the environment and
vice versa. We should start from thinking of this
in terms of a single system. And so the
boundary is always fluid and and can be penetrated,
can be negotiated by the, the things that we're
engaging with in the environment. So to put that
in less metaphysical terms, think about the relationship between
humans and their technologies and tools and artifacts and
how the, the kind of expertise and skills that
we have to go back to starting from thinking
about habits and skills are ones that incorporate. The
tools and technologies become incorporated in our habits and
skills in all kinds of ways. You know, so
mobile phones, so if you have them in your
pocket and you're having a conversation with me right
now, then that's gonna change the character of the
conversation because you're gonna be sensing your mobile phone
and whether it's going off in your pocket or
not. Um, AND that will affect, you know, to,
to what extent you're able to, you know, to
be present and to listen to what I'm saying
to you, um. So the boundary between you and
and your environment. I think is is one that
Because of the way that we make use of
tools and technologies now as human beings is one
that uh is not fixed and uh it's more
plastic and and undergoing change all the time.
So finally, let's get then, and you've already alluded
to it just a few minutes ago, let's get
into the topic of culture and culturation. From this
perspective of ecological and active cognition, how do you
approach culture and enculturation?
Yeah, so, um, again, it's a, it's an interesting
question. All of your questions have been super interesting,
um. Um, SO. I'm going to approach it via
thinking about the extended mind, which we already touched
on, so. The key idea in in that famous
paper by Andy Clark and Dave Chalmers on the
extended mind was, you know, where does the the
mind end and the world begins, so that's about
this boundary between mind and world. Mhm. And uh
I already suggested that that boundary is fluid and
negotiable, so it's not fixed over time. So when
it comes to thinking about culture. Uh, AS something
that is part of the world, we can ask,
well, where, where does the, the mind as something
biological. And culture on the side of the world,
where do these two things meet up? And I
want to say that instead of thinking in terms
of a dichotomy of biology and culture, we should
instead think that that that the kind of animals
that we are. Uh, AS human beings, so this
is a question, what makes us human? We are
cultural animals, we are, we are shaped profoundly by
our social, cultural environments in development, so that goes
back to our earlier discussion of development, you know,
we see. The difference that social adversity, for instance,
can make to developmental processes and so whether somebody
develops chronic pain, for instance, can be profoundly influenced
by the social adversity that they encounter can make
it more likely that a pain experience can become
chronic pain that persists for a long time. Um,
SO how does that happen? Well, through the influence
of stressors, for instance, on, On um on the
body. Um, BUT you asked me about enculturation, so
if we think of biology and culture as, as
influencing each other dynamically. Then instead of thinking of
of culture as something like er along the lines
of a memetic model, where there's er something that
gets transmitted to us in the environment through social
learning processes or cultural learning processes and then. The,
the, uh the meme is the, the vehicle that
carries this kind of cultural knowledge that then gets
internalized by the brain. Um, WE would rather think
of the, the. Ecology that we inhabit as human
beings as already structured and shaped by social cultural
practices. So our form of life as human beings
is a is a social cultural form of life
from the outset. And then in development. Uh, ECOLOGICAL
psychologists talk about the process of the education of
attention and intention by others in our social environment,
in our social group. And those others are educating
us as to what information we can pay attention
to in developing our perception action systems, what affordances
are going to show up for us as as
ones that we can then perceive and pick up
information about. That process of developing these perception action
skills so the education of attention and intention is
happening in our uh encounters with other people. So
this leads to a view of um. Of inculturation
where in the extended mind literature, so in people
like Richard Minari for instance or Mark Rowlands. They
emphasize strongly how our plastic brains are, are shaped
in all kinds of ways by cultural practices, by
mathematical practices, by writing practices, by reading. This changes
the brain in profound ways, and they think of
this in terms of a kind of process of
cognitive integration, they describe it where, Certain brain processes
get reused for cultural purposes. Um, AND so that
involves a kind of process of taking something from
the culture like literacy. And then kind of Having
it installed on neural hardware that then gets reshaped
by those cultural practices. But I want to defend
a, a, a third wave view of the extended
mind that I've developed with Michael Kirchoff, that instead
of thinking of, Um, inculturation in terms of this
process of internalizing cultural forms of knowledge in the
hardware of the brain. We instead think of humans
as, as locuses of or loci, locuses is not
a word, loci of coordination, you know, where all
of the different cultural practices that organize the things
we do are centered on the body as this
dynamic singularity, but the body, uh, is part of
this, these, uh, this cultural ecology of practices. Um,
WHERE the body internal, well, it doesn't internalize it,
it develops certain skills, but those skills cannot be,
you know. In terms of the dynamic engagement of
the agent and the environment, we can't say that
the skills are once and for all the internalization
of the cultural practices, so now the practices can
be thrown away. But instead we should think in
terms of the, this agent in a cognitive ecology,
which is a, a, a position that you find
in Ed Hutchins's work on distributed cognition, for instance.
Right, uh, so yeah, I, I was actually going
to ask you, uh, uh, because, uh, it's good
that you mentioned distributed cognition right there at the
end. I mean, when it comes to a culture.
I mean, do you think we should always approach
it as a distributed form of cognition, because I
mean culture, at least as far as I understand
it and even through your own framework, I think
this would also apply is not something that exists
in the minds of. Individuals but is distributed across
a collective, correct, or or is that or is
that or is that not the right way of
looking at it.
Yeah, so that's why I was, I was talking
about a cognitive ecology that that the, the cultural
forms of knowledge are indeed distributed across the. The
collective that inhabit that particular ecology, um. So it's
a, a form of cultural knowledge is a form
of collective intelligence in that you know it's distributed
over multiple agents that contribute in different ways to
the the maintaining of that cultural form of knowledge.
Um, SO in the, the famous Hutchins navy ship.
Example where he went onto a US Navy ship
and did an ethnography of the, the problem solving
behaviors of the. Uh, OF the, the people that
were sailing the ship navigating, uh, through the seas,
um, he was, was describing there how the problem
solving was distributed across the, the whole group across
the team. And, so it's a kind of collective
intelligence that he's describing and. And I think what
goes for that example of er of the navy
ship would apply more generally as well to cultural
forms of knowledge that they're they're distributed forms of
knowledge that are scaffolded in many ways by the.
The tools and technologies that we make use of.
Uh, SO cognitive ethnographers talk about these tasks, space-time
configurations as where cognition happens um. And we need
to go into the wild and observe those kind
of tasks, space-time configurations to understand how cognition works
so. So I think that that's still a very
important uh line of research within 4E cognition, this
cognitive ethnography. Where we actually observe and describe, this
is a link with phenomenology again, how, how is
it that problem solving and cognition works in the
wild.
Uh, BUT then, uh, does the ecological and active
framework that you, um, I mean, I mean, uh,
that, that basically you've been, uh, building up through
your work, uh, can it also apply to understanding
A collective intelligence and cognition that is not, that
does not operate strictly within individuals but is distributed
across individuals.
I think that uh you know, so far a
lot of the work that's been done on. Ecological
psychology has been focusing on dyadic interactions between. Individuals
or on small groups. You know, so Studying cognition
within larger, studying collective intelligence and looking at how
intelligence works within larger groups and organizations and institutions.
Um, I think that's something that's beginning to happen.
Or has been happening for a while in in
distributed cognition, in cognitive ethnography. And And so getting
a kind of conversation going between ecological psychology and
the methods that are used there and and this
distributed cognition and ethnographic research I think is valuable.
And and some of those conversations are beginning to
happen and I think that's exciting. The other thing
that I would look at is the concept of
affordances, so. Um, WE haven't really talked much about
how affordances are used in the work that we
do, but we tend to, uh, try to have
an understanding of affordance that can connect people that
work in ecological psychology that are more concerned with
social psychology, so and looking at social interactions between
people. And perception and action, people who are looking
at kind of skilled behavior. So we try to
develop a concept of affordance which uh can be
useful for both of those communities within ecological psychology.
Um, um, SO we start from thinking of affordances
in relation to social cultural practices. Um, AND that's,
that's the link to the kind of collective intelligence
that comes from cultural forms of knowledge in that
that. That kind of knowing is there in the
members of practices who have been trained to develop
certain skills and expertise so that they can take
part in a practice to think about craftspeople as
an example of this, um. And, and so affordances
we then think kind of. Are something that grow
out of and develop out of these social cultural
practices. At least for animals that are social and
cultural forms of life, um, that goes for many
animals, uh, not just humans. But the environments that
social, cultural forms of life inhabit. Have affordances that
come from the ways in which the environment has
been modified. And given structure, I think about niche
construction by the, the social cultural ways of life
of those animals. So there are certain affordances that
kind of grow and develop out of social cultural
practices. And those affordances we think are also important
for understanding collective intelligence and And more social cultural
forms of intelligence.
Mhm. Yeah, no, no, that, that is really very
fascinating, and as we were talking, I Uh, I,
I can't, uh, avoid seeing the many different connections
that there, that can be made across several different
disciplines. I mean, I, I can even think about
anthropologists and psychologists that I've interviewed and, uh, biologists
as well and how there's a line here that
could run all the way from uh Uh, but,
uh, even evolutionary biology, developmental biology, uh, and then
cognitive science, cognitive psychology, social psychology, and, and, uh,
cultural anthropology, and even within anthropology, a more human
behavioral, uh, science kind of framework, and then adding,
and then adding ecological psychology to it and Uh,
concepts like affordances and then when it comes to
the extended evolutionary synthesis, the work of people like
John Od linksmi and niche construction and all of
that, and then, uh, I mean several different approaches
within, um, cultural psychology, social psychology, and even, uh,
cultural evolutionary theory. Um, THERE are several different approaches
that people have to understand, to understanding culture and
all of that, because I, I, I mean, of
course it's not that all of exactly everything from
all of those disciplines perhaps. Uh, WOULD fit together
and, uh, and it was a, a complete picture,
but uh, but uh I, I, I definitely see,
uh, lines that can run through all of them
in a, in, in a more multidisciplinary kind of
approach and framework.
Yeah, so I think the way I would see
the thread there that you're that you're uh that
you're pulling on is that all of these different
fields that you just mentioned are in the end
concerned with the question of what it is to
be human. And, and I think that that we
get an answer to that question also from, um,
from the ecological and active cognitive scientists that converges
in many ways with all of those different fields
that you just pointed to in, in thinking that
we are in cultured beings and the the culture
and and sociality are, are fundamental to the kind
of existence that we lead as human beings and,
and that's also a central theme in phenomenology, so.
I find it fascinating that that the phenomenological understanding
of what it is to be human is one
that is converging in so many ways with um
with what science is telling us as well. So
we have a and and this convergence, I think,
you know, points to the. The possibility of Having
a scientific naturalistic understanding of the sorts of things
that phenomenologists were saying about what it is to
be human, um. And In the end, I want
to be a naturalist in how I think about
the mind and and life. Um, AND, you know,
so this kind of convergence, I think helps us
to, to see how one could have a phenomenological.
Perspective and at the same time hold on to
a naturalistic metaphysics.
Yeah, no, no, definitely, and I think that we
can, uh, it would be possible even for us
to go to take a step further when it
comes to even the epistemology of science because science
is also a sociocultural institution that is embedded within
a particular socio-cultural context and Uh, I mean, even
many of the ideas that people produce in science,
I mean, um, we do not need to look
at them as just, uh, abstract things, but as
things that come about or arise from a particular
socio-cultural environment where then for understanding how it operates.
We could again apply the sort of framework we've
been talking here about today uh with all the
different lines that I just mentioned that could run
through many other disciplines.
Yeah, Yeah, that's very interesting that. That actually And
that Practice of doing science itself is one that
can be understood using these um ecological inactive ideas,
so you get a kind of naturalized epistemology from
uh ecological inactive cognitive science as well, yeah, fascinating,
yeah. Yeah. One thing that we didn't get to
which I maybe I want to just bring up
briefly before we close, is the idea of neuropheenomenology
and. So the central idea there was that there's
this reciprocal constraint between phenomenology and and science. Um,
AND I think you've just illustrated the, the bidirectionality
there nicely that, um, that phenomenology gives us this
constraint in the sense that it, it gives us
a way of. Describing and analyzing what needs to
be explained about the mind and what it is
to be human by science. But, um But at
the same time, science is a constraint on phenomenology
in that science can lead to all kinds of
discoveries. Um, Mellop Ponte's examples were neurological patients, but
uh we can think about, uh, other kinds of
altered states of consciousness, for instance, that will lead
us to refine our phenomenological descriptions. And I think
that constraint can also be applied to scientific knowledge
and thinking about how scientific knowledge is produced that
we can. We can think that if you have
a phenomenological perspective, then you're gonna see science as
something that is a practice that happens in the
life world and the kinds of knowledge that we
can produce and generate by doing science. ARE um
Uh, ways of knowing the world that come from
the kinds of environments that we construct as scientists
and the practices that we have as scientists. So,
um, so this kind of. Um, DIALOGUE as it
were between phenomenology and science can lead to, to
an understanding of scientific knowledge and science as well
as a kind of practice, a cultural practice that
we engage in. Um, AND that isn't necessarily a
constructionist picture, we can still have a kind of
objectivity to scientific knowledge within that. It's just that
we need to think of um of objectivity in
a more human centered way, not as a view
from a view from nowhere but in relation to
to human practices where science is another kind of
human practice.
Right, right, no, no, that is really fascinating. So,
er, Doctor Kiversin, er, just before we go, er,
would you like to tell the audience where they
can find your work on the internet?
Sure, yeah, so, um. You can find most of
my work on research gate on academia, um. And
we tend to try to publish open access, or
most of the publications that we've been discussing are
open access app uh publications that you can easily
get hold of, um. You can find the details
of the Lemon Tree Center that Ricardo I mentioned
I'm part of. We have a website called the
Lemon Tree Center Point NL, which we're based in
the Netherlands, um, so go visit our website if
you want to know more about the work that
we're doing in between. Uh, PHILOSOPHY and psychiatry, which
is not something that we really got to discuss
today, but it's a whole another area of the
things that I'm involved in. And yeah, thanks so
much Ricardo for a fascinating conversation. I really enjoyed
it.
No, thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show, and I agree that
it was a very fascinating conversation. Hi guys, thank
you for watching this interview until the end. If
you liked it, please share it, leave a like
and hit the subscription button. The show is brought
to you by Enlights Learning and Development done differently.
Check their website at enlights.com and also please consider
supporting the show on Patreon or PayPal. I would
also like to give a huge thank you to
my main patrons and PayPal supporters, Perergo Larsson, Jerry
Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf, Alex, Adam Cassel,
Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis, Eric Elena, John
Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri Robert Windegerru Inai
Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor, Michel Stormir, Samuel
Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and Hal Herzognun, Machael
Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel Curric Hines, Mark
Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran, David Sloan Wilson,
Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono Correa. Yannik Punter
DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis Nico Barbaro, Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka
Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin,
John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas
Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pancortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary
Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and Wisman. Daniel Friedman,
William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus,
Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Dio Costa, Anton
Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr. Old Eringbon. Esterri,
Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon,
Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gelbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine
Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam
Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Janaertner, Ursula Guinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and
Jos Necht. A special thanks to my producers Iar
Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis
Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you for all.